Mentoring for Inspiration Talk
"Recognizing Potential: A Ripple Effect"
Hubie Ballard

In one sentence, what is your idea worth sharing?
All students need help; if we fail to recognize their moment of need, we miss an opportunity to send ripples of hope that could help millions - ripples imparted by their backgrounds and experiences, their intellect and brilliance, and unfettered potential. 

Provide a description or outline of your Talk:
I. Lessons in Stone Skipping
a. The long-distance throws; the almighty leaps out of water; the ripple of all ripples.

II. Life on a Dairy Farm 
a. A strange path from engineering to medicine that started with words I didn't expect to hear.  

III. There Has Always Been More to It
a. The opportunity to help the sickest babies via technology...technology that provides these tiny patients - some of whom are the size of a coke can - with a chance to survive. 

IV. My Almighty Leap Out of Water
a. My cancer diagnosis, a 6-month prognosis and existential dread (oh my!)
b. Facing my mortality, I asked: How can I do better? How can I do more? For me, for my students and for those we serve?

V. So, I'm Not Alone? 
a. Conquering cancer allowed me to recognize my potential 
b. No longer afraid of my "when", I discovered my "why".
c. When I teach, I learn. When I mentor, I grow. 

VI. Recognize Potential Every Step of the Way
a. From within to those around. We are limitless when we work together.

VII. Lessons in Stone Skipping 
a. Life is a series of ripples. Circumstance may give you the skipping stones, but you control how you throw them...the flat, smooth and expected ones; and the bulkier, heavier, unwanted but teeming-with-unrecognized-potential ones. 
b. Throw the stone. 

In 3-4 sentences, explain what qualifies you to speak on this topic.
Like so many of us, my life is a mosaic of moments - some carefully placed with the steady hand of expectation, others shattered by the unforeseen and terrifying - leading me to a career where humanity and technology are integrated with the hope of healing.
More importantly, each piece of my mosaic has allowed me to appreciate what scares and motivates me so that I may continue to help our students as they find their place in a profession that is both unrelenting and profoundly transformative.
With over 25 years of experience mentoring more than 1,000 students, my journey as an educator, survivor, and advocate for innovation has shown me the profound impact of recognizing potential in ourselves and others.

How does your idea fit?
When I think of Mosaic Minds, I think about students. Their passion, purpose and potential. The big moments they always carry with them...the quiet minutiae of their day-to-day - all of which inform who they are. 
They share a vision. One which many consider to be among the first signs of humanity: helping others. 
I strongly believe that when we help our learners recognize their potential, we send ripples of hope that could impact millions. And a good place to start is with our very first student: ourselves. 

How long do you think your talk will be? This is not final and there is room for flexibility.
15-20 minutes

What TED/TEDxTalk has inspired you the most and why?
Poet Ali's on the "Language of being human".  
Poet Ali emphasizes that humanity has a universal "language" beyond words - a way of communicating through emotions, actions, and shared experiences. He recognizes this potential for every individual, which aligns beautifully with the concept of Mosaic Thinking, where diverse perspectives come together to create something unified and profound.
Poet Ali encourages empathy, understanding, and breaking down barriers, which aligns with my goal of recognizing potential and fostering growth in others.


